# Installation Guide

GameMaker is designed for use on **macOS** and **Windows** desktop
computers with the minimum specifications mentioned
[here](http://www.yoyogames.com/get#sysreq) . You can download the
GameMaker installer from your YoYo Account page on the [YoYo Games
Website](https://accounts.yoyogames.com/login) . Once installed, the
first time you run GameMaker you may be prompted to update before being
able to use the product. After any updates have been installed, you will
be required to supply the licence details for your YoYo Games Account
(see [here](Licencing_Information) for more information) before
being able to use the product, meaning that the first time you use
GameMaker **you must have an internet connection** . After the initial
login, you should be able to use the product offline, however it will
periodically require that you connect to verify the login account. It is
worth noting that - depending on the licence type that you have - you
may be required to install additional components or follow addition
steps to set up and use GameMaker for specific platforms. For full
information on what each platform requires, please see this article on
the YoYo Games Helpdesk: [ GameMaker Required
SDKs](https://help.yoyogames.com/hc/en-us/articles/227860547-GMS2-Required-SDKs)
.

# Stable And Beta Versions

The version you download from the YoYo Games web page should be the
current **Stable** version of GameMaker , but there may also be another
" **Beta** " version available which is used to showcase or test new
functionality before it goes into a final stable build. The full version
details are as follows:

-   **Stable** : This version is the one you would be using for general
    development and is recommended for use with any commercial product.
    It may lack certain features available in the Beta versions, but
    this is because they haven't been fully tested or require additional
    work.
-   **Beta** : The Beta version of GameMaker is for those that wish to
    try out new features before they get added to the Stable build, or
    for those that require a coming fix for an issue. It is not
    recommended that you use the Beta build for final game production
    unless it contains an important fix for a bug that is holding up
    your project. You can get the Beta build of GameMaker from your YoYo
    Account "Downloads" page, and it can be installed and run
    side-by-side with the Stable build. Please note that if you are
    running GameMaker through **Steam** then you will not have access to
    the Beta build of the product using Steam itself, although you can
    still download and use the desktop version.
