# Licencing Information

Once you have downloaded and installed GameMaker , the first time you
use it you will be requested to input your licence details:  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Getting_Started_Login.png)  

## YoYo Account

Your licence is tied to a **YoYo Account** (YYA) and you are required to
have made one to be able to use GameMaker . This account holds all your
licence details for the YoYo Games products that you own, and is also
used for the [YoYo Games
Marketplace](../Introduction/The_Marketplace) . You can find out
further information about the YYA from the following page:

-   [Creating A YoYo
    Account](https://help.yoyogames.com/hc/en-us/articles/216757288-Creating-a-YoYo-Account)

## Opera account

You can use the " **Opera Single Sign-In** " button to sign in using
your Opera account, however this still requires you to have a YoYo
Account and to have your Opera account linked with your YoYo account
first (which you can do [on this
page](https://accounts.yoyogames.com/linked_accounts) ).

## LicencingÂ Information

You can read the following pages for information on how to obtain
licences for GameMaker :

-   [ GameMaker Free
    Licences](https://help.yoyogames.com/hc/en-us/articles/230492887)
-   [Which Licence Is Right For
    Me?](https://help.yoyogames.com/hc/en-us/articles/115002637011)

**IMPORTANT** After purchasing any new licence for GameMaker we
recommend that you **log out of the IDE and then restart GameMaker **
**and log back in again** to make sure that the new licence is applied
correctly. You can log out from the [File
Menu](../IDE_Navigation/Menus/The_File_Menu) .

# Proxy Support

If you require Proxy Support for your installation of GameMaker , this
can be added simply by clicking the **Proxy** . This will bring up the
following window:  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Getting_Started_Proxy.png)  
You can now add in your proxy details. Some of the fields shown above
are optional and if there is one you don't require then simply leave the
field blank. Before continuing however it is worth noting that if you
have set a proxy in your [Windows Internet
Options](https://www.isunshare.com/windows-10/4-ways-to-open-internet-options-in-windows-10l)
, and it doesn't require a username/password, then it should just "as
is" and you probably will not be required to set up the proxy in
GameMaker . If your proxy does require a username and/or password, then
you'll need to add them in to the fields shown in the window above. Note
that in these cases the username/password/proxy details will always be
required, and that the proxy IP should also have the port added, ie:
xx.xx.xx.xx:port . Once you have added the relevant information, click
on Okay and log in to GameMaker as normal.
