# The Device Manager

The **Device Manager** is accessed by clicking  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Icons/Icon_LMB.png)  
on the pencil button  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Icons/Icon_Pencil.png)  
within the [Target List](../Introduction/Compiling) :  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/TargetList.png)  
Clicking this button will open the **Device Manager** where you can
configure different devices for the target platforms that you wish to
compile and test on (note that the platforms available will depend on
the [Licence](GMS2_Version_Information) that you have and not all of
them may be visible). Below you can find details on configuring devices
for each of the target platforms: [ Android Android ](#)  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Device_Manager_Android.png)  
Here you can click on the *Add New Device* button to add a new Android
device to the list manually, or you can click the *Detect Device* button
to have GameMaker automatically detect any devices connected through a
wired connection. You can also set up an **Android Virtual Device** by
clicking the button marked *Run AVD* . This will open up the Android
Virtual Device manager where you can create a new AVD (see
[here](https://developer.android.com/studio/run/managing-avdsl) for
more information). Once you have one created, you need to launch it from
the AVD manager and then in GameMaker click on the *Detect Device*
button and it should be added automatically to the device list:  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Device_Manager_AVD.png)  
Once you have a device (physical or virtual) added, you can then check
the connection using the *Test Connection* button or remove it from the
list again by clicking the *Remove Device* button. [ HTML5 HTML5 ](#)  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Device_Manager_HTML5.png)  
The HTML5 device manager is for adding different browsers to the device
list for targeting when running. To start with, you should click the
*Detect Browsers* button, which should create devices for each of the
installed browsers on your machine. If your browser is not listed, you
can also click the *Add New Browser* button and then give the device a
name and point GameMaker to the path for the browser executable. The
additional available fields can be set up to help control how the
browser runs your projects, with the following options available:

-   **Browser Command Line Arguments** : Here you can add in any command
    line arguments to be appended to the browser path. You can find a
    list of these from the following links to the main popular browsers:
    -   [Chromium
        (Chrome)](https://peter.sh/experiments/chromium-command-line-switches/)
    -   [Firefox](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Command_Line_Options)
    -   [Internet
        Explorer](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/internet-explorer/ie-developer/general-info/hh826025(v=vs.85))
-   **Web Server Address** : The address of the web server to target
    (default is 127.0.0.1). You may need to change this depending on the
    specifications of different APIs, for example, Facebook would
    require this toÂ be set to http://localhost (and then have that
    whitelisted on their app console).
-   **Web Server Port** : Set the port number for the web server
    (default is 51264).
-   **Allowed Web Server IPs / CIDR IP Ranges** : Set the allowed web
    server, hostnames and CIDR IP ranges as required.

[ iOS iOS ](#)  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Device_Manager_iOS.png)  
Before you can set up your iOS devices, you must have set up your Mac
device and tested it's connection (see below for details). Once that is
done you can select the Mac that you want to target from the drop down
menu at the top of the window and then click the *Detect Device* button
to have GameMaker automatically find any connected iOS devices,
including simulators. Once connected, the device details will be shown
in the list in this window, and you can edit the device name to make it
more user friendly (this change only affects how the device is presented
in the Target Manager and nothing else). [ tvOS tvOS ](#)  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Device_Manager_tvOS.png)  
Before you can set up your tvOS devices, you must have set up your Mac
device and tested it's connection (see below for details). Once that is
done you can select the Mac that you want to target from the drop down
menu at the top of the window and then click the *Detect Device* button
to have GameMaker automatically find any connected tvOS devices,
including simulators. Once connected, the device details will be shown
in the list in this window, and you can edit the device name to make it
more user friendly (this change only affects how the device is presented
in the Target Manager and nothing else). [ macOS macOS ](#)  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Device_Manager_Mac.png)  
To add a Mac device to the manager, you must first click on the button
labelled *Add New device* which will add the device and create some
blank fields which you will need to fill in to enable the connection.
First you need to **name** the device so that you can identify it in the
target list and then give the **host name** (or IP) of the Mac. You must
then give the **username** of the user that you wish to link to, and the
**password** that they used. If you wish, you can also change the
**Install Folder** on the Mac to wherever you would prefer GameMaker to
store the build files for your projects. When that is all done, you can
click on the *Test Connection* button to make sure that GameMaker can
communicate with the Mac. **NOTE** : If you are developing for iOS then
you must have done this first and have established a working connection
to the Mac you wish to use for development. **NOTE** : You **must** have
enabled **Remote Login** on the target mac. This can be done by going to
**Preferences** -\> **Sharing** and **Enable Remote Login** for the user
you want to be able to login. [ Ubuntu (Linux) Ubuntu (Linux) ](#)  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Device_Manager_Ubuntu.png)  
To add an Ubuntu (Linux) device to the manager, you must first click on
the button labelled *Add New Device* which will add the device and
create some blank fields which you will need to fill in to enable the
connection. First you need to **name** the device so that you can
identify it in the target list and then give the **host name** (or IP)
of the Ubuntu machine (or VM). You must then give the **username** of
the user that you wish to link to, and the **password** that they used.
You are also required to give an **install folder** on the Ubuntu
machine that you want to use for installing your projects. When that is
all done, you can click on the *Test Connection* button to make sure
that GameMaker can communicate with the Ubuntu machine. Note that the
final executable created by GameMaker **will depend on the architecture
of the device being targetted** , which can be either **x64** or **ARM**
. For example, if you connect a Raspberry Pi 3 or 4, the executable
created will be a 32bit ARM executable, and if you connect a Linux PC it
will be 64bit x64 executable. [ Windows UWP Windows UWP ](#) Before you
can add a device for the Windows 10 UWP target, you need to have enabled
**Developer Mode** and set up the **Device Portal** on the device. If
you do not do this, GameMaker will not be able to communicate with the
device nor properly create your UWP apps. The easiest way to enable
Developer Mode is to simply type " *Developer Mode* " into Windows
Search and then click the " *Settings* " entry that will be shown. This
will open the following window:  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Device_Manager_UWP_DeveloperMode.png)  
You need to select the **Developer Mode** option (which may require that
Windows downloads and installs some additional packages), and then
select the option beneath that, **Enable Device Portal** . The device
portal is what will permit GameMaker to communicate with the Windows 10
PC, and when enabled you will be required to give a *Username* and
*Password* :  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Device_Manager_UWP_ShowDevMode.png)  
Note that the username and password should be unique to the portal and
must not be those used by your Microsoft Account or other Windows
credentials. Once you have given this information, click the button
labelled *Apply* and then close the settings manager and go back to
GameMaker . For more information on the Device Portal please see this
Microsoft Article: [Device Portal For
Desktop](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/debug-test-perf/device-portal-desktop)
. You can now open the **Device Manager** in GameMaker and set up a
device (or devices) for use:  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Device_Manager_UWP.png)  
To add a Windows 10 UWP compliant device to the manager, you must first
click on the button labelled *Add New Device* which will add the device
and create some blank fields which you will need to fill in to enable
the connection. First you need to **name** the device so that you can
identify it in the target list and then give the **host** - this is the
IP address of the Windows 10 device on the network that is to host the
game and **must be suffixed by** " :50443 " to set the port number.
After that add the **User Name** and **Password** that you set up in the
Device Portal (as mentioned previously). You can leave the PIN blank as
it is not required for UWP Windows 10 Desktop. For more specific setup
details that cover the different UWP outputs (Desktop, XboxOne) please
see the YYG helpdesk: [Setting Up
UWP](https://help.yoyogames.com/hc/en-us/sections/115000309028-UWP) .
All the different device windows have an option at the bottom to **Clear
Devices** which, when clicked, will remove all the connected devices
from the list. Once you have set up your devices, you can then connect
to any one of them from the Target options at the top of the GameMaker
IDE and testing/building your game will push the project to that
device:  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Device_Manager_TargetList.png)  
