# UpdatingÂ Guide

The GameMaker IDE will periodically check for updates and then download
them automatically. Some of these updates will be optional and you can
choose not to install them if you don't wish to or think that some of
the changes may break a project that you are about to publish. However
there are some updates that include important fixes or improvements that
cannot be skipped and GameMaker will force an update in these cases.  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Getting_Started_New_Version.png)  
GameMaker is more than just an IDE and has a number of different runtime
tools that it uses behind the scenes to build you games for the
different target platforms available. These tools are mainly the
different runners and compilers that each platform requires, and you can
actually have several of each at any one time. What this means is that
you can "pick and choose" which compiler version and which runner
version to use should you have found any issues with the current one or
are aiming at a very specific target version or platform. Tools will
automatically update when there is a new version available, but you can
then use the **Runtime Feeds Preferences** to select which ones you
actually want to use. For more information on runtime updates please see
[Preferences - Runtime
Feeds](IDE_Preferences/Runtime_Feed_Preferences) . Note that
downloading and installing a runtime can take a few minutes, but you can
see a progress bar for the download at the top right of the IDE:  
![](https://gms.magecorn.com/Manual/assets/Images/Setup_And_Version/Getting_Started_Installing_Runtimes.png)  
